Advent 2018: Postmortem debugging Go services with Delve (#289)
gopheracademy/gopheracademy-web: content/advent-2018/postmortem-debugging-delve.md

To debug the problem we need to bump into the problem first. Let’s start the VM, build our HTTP service, run it and see what will happen.

```
= vagrant ssh server-test-1
Welcome to Ubuntu 18.04.1 LTS (GNU/Linux 4.15.0-33-generic x86_64)

:~$ cd /vagrant/example/server
:/vagrant/example/server$ go build -o server ./
:/vagrant/example/server$ ./server --addr=:10080

server listening addr=:10080
```

Using [wrk][] HTTP benchmarking tool start adding some load. I run this demo on my MacBook with four cores. Running wrk with 4 threads and 1000 connections is enough to simulate the failure we want to debug. Run the following command in a new terminal panel:

```
= wrk -d1m -t4 -c1000 'http://server-test-1:10080'
Running 1m test @ http://server-test-1:10080
  4 threads and 1000 connections
  ···
```

After a brief period, the server gets stacked. Even after wrk finished the run, the service is unable to process an incoming request:

```
= curl --max-time 5 'http://server-test-1:10080/'
curl: (28) Operation timed out after 5001 milliseconds with 0 bytes received
```

Indeed, we have a problem! Let's look what is happening.

---

> In the similar situation with our production service, after a brief period, the total number of spawned goroutines for incoming requests has risen so much, the server became unresponsible. Even requests to pprof debug handlers were *s-u-u-u-per slow*, making it look like the server was completely "dead". Similarly, our attempts to kill the process with `SIGQUIT` to [get the stack dump of running goroutines][1] didn't seem to work.

Reviewer: Typo here at `unresponsible`.
```suggestion
In the similar situation with our production service, after a brief period, the total number of spawned goroutines for incoming requests has risen so much, the server became unresponsive. Even requests to pprof debug handlers were *s-u-u-u-per slow*, making it look like the server was completely "dead". Similarly, our attempts to kill the process with `SIGQUIT` to [get the stack dump of running goroutines][1] didn't seem to work.
```

---

## GDB and Coredump

We can start with trying to inspect the running service with GDB (GNU Debugger).

*Running a debugger in the production environment will likely require additional privileges. If in doubt, be wise and always consult with your operations team first.*

Connect to another SSH session on the VM, find server process's id, and attach to the process with the debugger:

```
= vagrant ssh server-test-1
Welcome to Ubuntu 18.04.1 LTS (GNU/Linux 4.15.0-33-generic x86_64)

:~$ ps -ef | grep server
vagrant   1628  1557  0 14:45 pts/0	00:00:01 ./server --addr=:10080

> :~$ sudo gdb --pid=1628 /vagrant/example/server/server

Reviewer 2: I would add a `cd /vagrant` so that the core file is in the right directory for later and can be analysed from outside the VM.

```

> With the debbuger attached to the process, we can run GDB's `bt` command (aka backtrace) to check the stack trace of the current thread:

Reviewer 3: debbuger => debugger

#2  0x000000000040c382 in runtime.notesleep (n=0xa9a160 <runtime.m0+320>) at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/lock_futex.go:151
#3  0x0000000000433b4a in runtime.stoplockedm () at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go:2165
#4  0x0000000000435279 in runtime.schedule () at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go:2565
#5  0x00000000004353fe in runtime.park_m (gp=0xc000066d80) at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go:2676
#6  0x000000000045ae1b in runtime.mcall () at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:299
#7  0x000000000045ad39 in runtime.rt0_go () at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:201
#8  0x0000000000000000 in ?? ()
```

Honestly, I’m not a GDB expert, but it seems that Go runtime is putting threads to sleep. *But why?*

Debugging a live process is “fun”, also let’s grab a coredump of the process to analyse it offline. We can do it with GDB's `gcore` command. The core file will be saved as `core.<process_id>` in the current working directory. Note, even for our simple server, the file will be pretty big. It’s likely to be huge for production service.

```
(gdb) gcore
Saved corefile core.1628

> (gdb) quit

Reviewer 2: Here I get a prompt that the process is still alive when we exit gdb:
```
(gdb) quit
A debugging session is active.

        Inferior 1 [process 2570] will be detached.

Quit anyway? (y or n) y
Detaching from program: /vagrant/example/server/server, process 2570
```

= du -h core.1628
1.2G    core.1628
```

With coredump saved, we're no longer required to keep the process running. Feel free to “kill -9” it.

*For more info on the topic of debugging with GDB, check out Go’s own "[Debugging Go Code with GDB][2]".*

## Enter Delve, Debugger for Go

[Delve][] is the debugger for Go programs. It is similar to GDB but is aware of Go's runtime, data structures and other internals of the language.

I highly recommend a talk by Alessandro Arzilli “[Internal Architecture of Delve, a Debugger For Go](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IKnTr7Zms1k)” from GopherCon EU 2018 if you're interested to know about Delve's internals.

Delve is written in Go so installing it as simple as running:

```

> = go get -u github.com/derekparker/delve/cmd/dlv

Reviewer 2: Where do you execute this command? Inside the VM or outside? It's clear to me now, but readers may not know.

```

With Delve installed we can start analysing the core file by running `dlv core <path to service binary> <core file>`. We start by listing all goroutines that were running when the coredump was taken. Delve's `goroutines` command does exactly this:

```

> = dlv core example/server/server core.1628

Reviewer 2: This requires that the current working directory was `/vagrant` within the VM when `gdb` was run, see above.

(dlv) goroutines
  ···
  Goroutine 4611 - User: /vagrant/example/server/metrics.go:113 main.(*Metrics).CountS (0x703948)
  Goroutine 4612 - User: /vagrant/example/server/metrics.go:113 main.(*Metrics).CountS (0x703948)
  Goroutine 4613 - User: /vagrant/example/server/metrics.go:113 main.(*Metrics).CountS (0x703948)

```

*Unfortunately, in a real case scenario, the list can be so big, it doesn't even fit into terminal's scroll buffer. Remember that the server spawns a goroutine for each incoming request, so “goroutines” command has shown us a list of almost a million items. Let's pretend that we faced exactly this, and think of a way to work through this situation.*

> We can run Delve in the "headless" mode to interact with the debugger via it's [JSON-RPC API](https://github.com/derekparker/delve/tree/master/Documentation/api).

Reviewer 2: Typo here, "it's" is the short for of "it is", the possessive form of "it" is "its", https://www.lawlessenglish.com/english-mistakes/its/
```suggestion
We can run Delve in the "headless" mode to interact with the debugger via its [JSON-RPC API](https://github.com/derekparker/delve/tree/master/Documentation/api).
```

Run the same `dlv core` command as we previously did, but this time specify that we need to start Delve’s API server:

```
= dlv core example/server/server core.1628 --listen :44441 --headless --log
API server listening at: [::]:44441
INFO[0000] opening core file core.1628 (executable example/server/server)  layer=debugger
```

> After debug server is running, we can send commands to it’s TCP port and store the output as raw JSON. Let's get the list of running goroutines once again, but this time saving the results to a file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After debug server is running, we can send commands to its TCP port and store the output as raw JSON. Let's get the list of running goroutines once again, but this time saving the results to a file:
```

```

> = echo -n '{"method":"RPCServer.ListGoroutines","params":[],"id":2}' | nc localhost 44441 > server-test-1_dlv-rpc-list_goroutines.json

Reviewer 2: Add `-w 1` to the netcat command so that it will terminate one second after EOF from stdin, otherwise the command will not terminate at all
```suggestion
= echo -n '{"method":"RPCServer.ListGoroutines","params":[],"id":2}' | nc -w 1 localhost 44441 > server-test-1_dlv-rpc-list_goroutines.json
```

      }
    },
    "threadID": 0
  },
  {
    "id": 2,
    "currentLoc": {
      "pc": 4387627,
      "file": "/usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go",
      "line": 303,
      "function": {
        "name": "runtime.gopark",
        "value": 4387392,
        "type": 0,
        "goType": 0,
        "optimized": true
      }
    },
    "userCurrentLoc": {
      "pc": 4387627,
      "file": "/usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go",
      "line": 303,
      "function": {
        "name": "runtime.gopark",
        "value": 4387392,
        "type": 0,
        "goType": 0,
        "optimized": true
      }
    },
    "goStatementLoc": {
      "pc": 4387029,
      "file": "/usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go",
      "line": 240,
      "function": {
        "name": "runtime.init.4",
        "value": 4386976,
        "type": 0,
        "goType": 0,
        "optimized": true
      }
    },
    "startLoc": {
      "pc": 4387056,
      "file": "/usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go",
      "line": 243,
      "function": {
        "name": "runtime.forcegchelper",
        "value": 4387056,
        "type": 0,
        "goType": 0,
        "optimized": true
      }
    },
    "threadID": 0
  },
  ...
```

> Every object in the JSON represents a single goroutine. By checking [“goroutines” command help](https://github.com/derekparker/delve/blob/master/Documentation/cli/README.md#goroutines) we can figure out what data Delve knows. We're interested in `userCurrentLoc` field, which is "topmost stackframe in user code".

Reviewer 2: The second sentence is a bit odd, and leaves the reader wondering what the "topmost stackframe in user code" is. My suggestion:
```suggestion
Every object in the JSON represents a single goroutine. The manual for Delev's [“goroutines” command help](https://github.com/derekparker/delve/blob/master/Documentation/cli/README.md#goroutines) tells us what Delve knows about each goroutine. We're interested in the field `userCurrentLoc`. Its description says it is the "topmost stackframe in user code", which means that this is usually the last location in our code the goroutine came across.
```

> Of all goroutines in the JSON let's list unique function names with the exact line numbers where function got paused:

Reviewer 2: Starting a sentence with "of" never goes well :smile:, how about:
```suggestion
In order to get an overview of what the goroutines did at the moment the core file was created let's collect and count all distinct function names and line numbers for all the `userCurrentLoc` fields for the goroutines:
```

```
= jq -c '.result[] | [.userCurrentLoc.function.name, .userCurrentLoc.line]' server-test-1_dlv-rpc-list_goroutines.json | sort | uniq -c

   1 ["internal/poll.runtime_pollWait",173]
1000 ["main.(*Metrics).CountS",113]
   1 ["main.(*Metrics).SetM",145]
   1 ["main.(*Metrics).startOutChannelConsumer",239]
   1 ["main.run",56]
   1 ["os/signal.signal_recv",139]
   6 ["runtime.gopark",303]
```

> The majority of goroutines (1000) have stacked in `main.(*Metrics).CountS:113`. Now, this is the perfect time to look at the source code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The majority of goroutines (1000) have stacked in `main.(*Metrics).CountS` at line 113. Now, this is the perfect time to look at the source code.
```

> The majority of goroutines (1000) have stacked in `main.(*Metrics).CountS:113`. Now, this is the perfect time to look at the source code.

Reviewer 3: stacked => stopped ???
```suggestion
The majority of goroutines (1000) have stopped in `main.(*Metrics).CountS:113`. Now, this is the perfect time to look at the source code.
```

> In the `main` package, find `Metrics` struct and look at its `CountS` method (see `example/server/metrics.go`):

Reviewer 2: Maybe link the relevant code on GitHub so readers can follow a link? Like this one: https://github.com/narqo/postmortem-debug-go/blob/2c42ca73ebd500fe8da1c6ac8ecaf4af143aca78/example/server/metrics.go#L93-L96

```go
// CountS increments counter per second.
func (m *Metrics) CountS(key string) {

>     // ···

Reviewer 2: I don't see anything else in the function, maybe remove the comment line and the empty line below?

    m.inChannel <- NewCountMetric(key, 1, second)
}
```

> Our server has stacked on sending to the `inChannel` channel. Let’s find out who is supposed to read from this channel. After inspecting the code, we should find the following function (example/server/metrics.go):

Reviewer 2: * Format the path the same way as the one above
 * Also add a link here? https://github.com/narqo/postmortem-debug-go/blob/2c42ca73ebd500fe8da1c6ac8ecaf4af143aca78/example/server/metrics.go#L110

```suggestion
Our server has stacked on sending to the `inChannel` channel. Let’s find out who is supposed to read from this channel. After inspecting the code, we should find the following function (in `example/server/metrics.go`):
```

```
// starts a consumer for inChannel
func (m *Metrics) startInChannelConsumer() {
    for inMetrics := range m.inChannel {
   	    // ···
    }
}
```

> The function reads values out of the channel and does something with them, one by one. In what possible situations, could the sending to this channel being blocked?

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure the comma in the last sentence is wrong, I'd remove it:
```suggestion
The function reads values out of the channel and does something with them, one by one. In what possible situations could the sending to this channel being blocked?
```

When working with channels, there are only four possible "oopsies", according to Dave Cheney's [Channel Axioms](https://dave.cheney.net/2014/03/19/channel-axioms):

> - send to a nil channel block forever

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- send to a nil channel blocks forever
```

> - receive from a nil channel block forever

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- receive from a nil channel blocks forever
```

- send to a closed channel panics
- receive from a closed channel returns the zero value immediately.

> "Send to a nil channel block forever" – at first sight, this sounds like something possible. But, after double-checking with the code, `inChannel` is initialised in the `Metrics` constructor. So it can't be nil.

Reviewer 2: * Add a link to the constructor? https://github.com/narqo/postmortem-debug-go/blob/2c42ca73ebd500fe8da1c6ac8ecaf4af143aca78/example/server/metrics.go#L75
 * "at first sight" and "sounds like" mixes two different metaphors, how about:
```suggestion
"Send to a nil channel block forever" – at first sight, this seems like something possible. But, after double-checking with the code, `inChannel` is initialised in the `Metrics` constructor. So it can't be nil.
```

> "Send to a nil channel block forever" – at first sight, this sounds like something possible. But, after double-checking with the code, `inChannel` is initialised in the `Metrics` constructor. So it can't be nil.

Reviewer 3: "at first sight, this seems possible"
```suggestion
"Send to a nil channel blocks forever" – at first sight, this sounds possible. But, after double-checking with the code, `inChannel` is initialised in the `Metrics` constructor. So it can't be nil.
```

> Let’s look at the list of functions we’ve got above. Could this (buffered) channel become full because we've stacked somewhere in `(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer()`?

Reviewer 2: * Which list of functions? I assume you meant the list of locations the goroutines in the core dump were paused in?
 * What do you mean with "stacked"? I'm not familiar with that word as a verb in this context, is this something I'm missing or is it very unusual? Did you mean "stuck"?

As you may notice, there is no `startInChannelConsumer` method in the list at all. But what if we stacked somewhere below the method’s callstack?

> Delve provides the start position from where we came to the user location, that is `startLoc` field in the JSON. Search for goroutines whose start location was in `startInChannelConsumer` function:

Reviewer 2: I think it'd be good to explain "user location" versus "runtime location" so that it becomes clear what is meant here. Also, in the paragraph above: "below the method's callstack" is hard to understand for readers without a lot of experience with debuggers.

```
= jq '.result[] | select(.startLoc.function.name | test("startInChannelConsumer$"))' server-test-1_dlv-rpc-list_goroutines.json

{
  "id": 20,
  "currentLoc": {
    "pc": 4387627,
    "file": "/usr/local/go/src/runtime/proc.go",
    "line": 303,
    "function": {
      "name": "runtime.gopark",
      "value": 4387392,
      "type": 0,
      "goType": 0,
      "optimized": true
    }
  },
  "userCurrentLoc": {
    "pc": 7355276,
    "file": "/vagrant/example/server/metrics.go",
    "line": 145,
    "function": {
      "name": "main.(*Metrics).SetM",
      "value": 7354992,
      "type": 0,
      "goType": 0,
      "optimized": true
    }
  },
  "goStatementLoc": {
    "pc": 7354080,
    "file": "/vagrant/example/server/metrics.go",
    "line": 95,
    "function": {
      "name": "main.NewMetrics",
      "value": 7353136,
      "type": 0,
      "goType": 0,
      "optimized": true
    }
  },
  "startLoc": {
    "pc": 7355584,
    "file": "/vagrant/example/server/metrics.go",
    "line": 167,
    "function": {
      "name": "main.(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer",
      "value": 7355584,
      "type": 0,
      "goType": 0,
      "optimized": true
    }
  },
  "threadID": 0

> }

Reviewer 2: I'd shorten the listing to the relevant parts, it's hard to read in the article and there's a lot of information in it you don't need at all (e.g. the block `goStatementLock`).

```

There is a single item in the response. That's promising!

> A goroutine with id "20" started at `main.(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer:167` and went up to `main.(*Metrics).SetM:145` (`userCurrentLoc` field) until it got stacked.

Reviewer 2: I think you mean "stuck" here again?
```suggestion
A goroutine with id "20" started at `main.(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer:167` and went up to `main.(*Metrics).SetM:145` (`userCurrentLoc` field) until it got stuck.
```

> A goroutine with id "20" started at `main.(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer:167` and went up to `main.(*Metrics).SetM:145` (`userCurrentLoc` field) until it got stacked.

Reviewer 3: I'm not familiar with the use of "stacked" in this article. Perhaps "blocked" is better.

> Knowing the id of the goroutine dramatically narrows down our scope of interest (we don't need to dig into raw JSON anymore, I promise :). With Delve's `goroutine` command change current goroutine to the one we'd found. `stack` command will print the stack trace of the goroutine:

Reviewer 2: The last sentence is incomplete:
```suggestion
Knowing the id of the goroutine dramatically narrows down our scope of interest (we don't need to dig into raw JSON anymore, I promise :). With Delve's `goroutine` command we can change current goroutine to the one we've found, then we can use the `stack` command to print the stack trace of the goroutine:
```

```
= dlv core example/server/server core.1628

(dlv) goroutine 20
Switched from 0 to 20 (thread 1628)

(dlv) stack -full

> 0  0x000000000042f32b in runtime.gopark

Reviewer 2: Shorten the listing, e.g. remove the entries 1-3.

   	~r4 = (unreadable empty OP stack)
   	gp = (*runtime.g)(0xc000001680)
   	mysg = *(unreadable read out of bounds)
   	t0 = 0

3  0x00000000004067a5 in runtime.chansend1
   at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/chan.go:125
   	c = (unreadable empty OP stack)
   	elem = (unreadable empty OP stack)

4  0x0000000000703b8c in main.(*Metrics).SetM
   at /vagrant/example/server/metrics.go:145
   	key = "metrics.raw_channel"
   	m = (*main.Metrics)(0xc000134000)
   	value = 100

5  0x0000000000704394 in main.(*Metrics).sendMetricsToOutChannel
   at /vagrant/example/server/metrics.go:206
   	m = (*main.Metrics)(0xc000134000)
   	scope = 0
   	updateInterval = (unreadable could not find loclist entry at 0x9d4ed for address 0x704393)

6  0x0000000000703f40 in main.(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer
   at /vagrant/example/server/metrics.go:184
   	m = (*main.Metrics)(0xc000134000)
   	inMetrics = main.Metric {Type: TypeCount, Scope: 0, Key: "server.req-incoming",...+2 more}
   	nextUpdate = (unreadable could not find loclist entry at 0x9d3fd for address 0x703f3f)

7  0x000000000045cf11 in runtime.goexit
   at /usr/local/go/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:1333
```

Bottom to top:

> (6) At `(*Metrics).startInChannelConsumer:184` a new value from the channel has been received

Reviewer 2: Add links to the source on GitHub here, too

(5) We called `(*Metrics).sendMetricsToOutChannel` first

(4) And `main.(*Metrics).SetM` next, passing `key="metrics.raw_channel"` and `value = 100`

> And so on until we've been blocked in `runtime.gopark` with “waitReasonChanSend”.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And so on until we've been blocked in `runtime.gopark` with `waitReasonChanSend`.
```

Everything makes sense now!

Within a single goroutine, the function that reads values out of a buffered channel tried to put additional values into the channel. As the number of incoming values to the channel became close to its capacity, the consumer-function deadlocked itself trying to add value to the full channel. Since the single channel's consumer was deadlocked, every new incoming request that tried adding values into the channel became blocked as well.

----

> And that’s our story. Using the described technique we’ve managed to find the root-cause the problem. The original piece of code was written many years ago. Nobody even looked at it and never thought it might bring such issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And that’s our story. Using the described technique we’ve managed to find the root cause of the problem. The original piece of code was written many years ago. Nobody even looked at it and never thought it might bring such issues.
```

> As you just saw not everything is yet ideal with the tooling. But the tooling exists and becomes better over time. I hope, I’ve encouraged you to give it a try. And I’m very interested to hear about other ways to work around a similar scenario.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you just saw not everything is ideal with the tooling yet. But the tools exists and becomes better over time. I hope, I’ve encouraged you to give it a try. And I’m very interested to hear about other ways to work around a similar scenario.
```
